@section News in 12

@itemize @bullet
@item
Support for the KOMA-Script classes.
Contributed by Mark Trettin <Mark.Trettin@@gmx.de>.

@item
Many more LaTeX and LaTeX2e commands are supported.
Done by Masayuki Ataka  <ataka@@milk.freemail.ne.jp>

@item
Support for @file{prosper.sty}, see @url{http://prosper.sourceforge.net/}.
Contributed by Phillip Lord <p.lord@@russet.org.uk>.

@item
@code{comment-region} now inserts @t{%%} by default.
Suggested by "Davide G. M. Salvetti" <salve@@debian.org>.

@item
You can now switch between using the @file{font-latex} (all emacsen),
the @file{tex-font} (Emacs 21 only) or no special package for font
locking.  Customize @code{TeX-install-font-lock} for this.

@item
Now use @t{-t landscape} by default when landscape option appears.
Suggested by Erik Frisk <frisk@@isy.liu.se>.

@item
Use @file{tex-fptex.el} for fpTeX support.
Contributed by Fabrice Popineau <Fabrice.Popineau@@supelec.fr>.

@item
New user option @code{LaTeX-top-caption-list} specifies environments
where the caption should go at top.
Contributed by ataka@@milk.freemail.ne.jp (Masayuki Ataka).

@item
Allow explicit dimensions in @file{graphicx.sty}.
Contributed by ataka@@milk.freemail.ne.jp (Masayuki Ataka).

@item
Limited support for @file{verbatim.sty}.
Contributed by ataka@@milk.freemail.ne.jp (Masayuki Ataka).

@item
Better support for asmmath items.
Patch by ataka@@milk.freemail.ne.jp (Masayuki Ataka).

@item
More accurate error parsing.
Added by David Kastrup <David.Kastrup@@t-online.de>.

@item
Bug fixes.

@end itemize
