@chapter Installation of AUC @TeX{}
@cindex Installation
@cindex Make
@cindex @file{Makefile}
@cindex @file{.emacs}
@cindex Site initialization
@cindex Initialization
@cindex @file{tex-site.el}
@cindex Personal customization
@cindex Site customization
@cindex Customization
@cindex Customization, personal
@cindex Customization, site

@section Compiling

The following describes how to install AUC @TeX{} under Unix.  You may
also be able to do use these instructions under some other operating
systems, if you have already installed the proper GNU tools, such as
@file{make}. 

To install AUC @TeX{} for an entire site (which may just be your own
personal Linux box), issue the following two commands as root:

@example
make 
make lispdir=/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp install
@end example

except that instead of @t{/usr/local/...} you should use the location of
your sites emacs installation.  AUC @TeX{} will then be installed in a
subdirectory named @file{auctex} of the @file{site-lisp} directory, and
the file @file{tex-site.el} will be stored directly in the
@file{site-lisp}.  You can now tell your users to enable AUC @TeX{} by
adding 

@example
(require 'tex-site)
@end example

to their @file{.emacs} file.

If you use xemacs instead, or if your emacs binary is named something
else than @file{emacs}, specify this by using the commands

@example
make EMACS=xemacs
make lispdir=/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp install
@end example

to install.

If you want to install AUC @TeX{} in your personal account, you should
chose a directory for all your emacs add-ons, for example an
@file{elisp} subdirectory in your home directory.  You can then install
AUC @TeX{} with the commands

@example
make 
make lispdir=$HOME/elisp install
@end example

You will then need to add the following lines to your @file{.emacs}
file:

@example
(setq load-path (cons "~/elisp" load-path))
(require 'tex-site)
@end example

@section Customizing

Next, you should edit the file @file{tex-site.el} to fit your local
site.  You do this by looking at the customization section in the
beginning of @file{tex.el} and copy the definitions that are wrong for
your site to @file{tex-site.el}.  Do @emph{not} edit @file{tex.el}
directly, or you will have to do all the work over again when you
upgrade AUC @TeX{}.  AUC @TeX{} will not overwrite your old
@file{tex-site.el} file next time you install, so you will be able to
keep all your customizations.

There are two variables with a special significance.

@defopt TeX-lisp-directory
The directory where you want to install the AUC @TeX{} lisp files. 
@end defopt

This variable is set automatically by the @code{make install} command.
If you don't issue a @code{make install}, for example if you don't want
to install AUC @TeX{} in a different place, you will have to set this
variable manually to the location of the compiled files.

@defopt TeX-macro-global
Directories containing the site's @TeX{} style files.
@end defopt

Normally, AUC @TeX{} will only allow you to complete a short list of
built-in macros and environments and on the macros you define yourself.
If you issue the @kbd{M-x TeX-auto-generate-global} command after
loading AUC @TeX{}, you will be able to complete on all macros available
in the standard style files used by your document.  To do this, you must
set this variable to a list of directories where the standard style
files are located.  The directories will be searched recursively, so
there is no reason to list subsirectories explicitly.

You probably also need to change @code{TeX-command-list} to make sure
that the commands used for starting @TeX{}, printing, etc. work on your
system.  Copy the definition from @file{tex.el} to @file{tex-site.el}
and edit the command names appropriately.
@vindex TeX-command-list

Finally, copy and edit @code{TeX-printer-list} to contain the printers
available at your site.
@vindex TeX-printer-list

To extract information from your sites @TeX{} macros, type @kbd{M-x
TeX-auto-generate-global} in your emacs.  This will only work if you
have set @code{TeX-macro-global} correctly in @file{tex-site.el}.

@section Contributed files

There are several files that are not part of AUC @TeX{} proper, but
included in the distribution in case they are useful.  

@table @file
@item hilit-LaTeX.el
Better highlighting for the obsolete @file{hilit19} package.

@item bib-cite.el
Better support for bibliographies and much more.

@item tex-jp.el
Support for Japanese.

@end table

Read the comments in the start of each file for more information about
how to install, what they do, and who wrote and maintains them.
